# Masters_DAT702

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cVW4Xy3zgpc 

BBC 3 made a three-episode documentary using VR to show mental health exploring borderline personality disorder, anorexia and bulimia and psychotic depression, this series interested me as it was the creators showing their mental illness through VR giving us a glimpse into how their minds work and allowing people to understand what is going on more clearly. The Psychotic depression episode shows a Danika explaining what she went through during her darkest time, she was able to draw how she felt during her time at the hospital, She talks about not wanting to be on medication and putting harsh chemicals into her body “almost felt like I was on a drip, but the drip was poison and this green chemicals and poison just taken over my whole body” (Kent, 2021) whilst saying this she draws an IV bag with green and connects it to her arm to show the viewer just how she felt and what was going through her head at the time. The end of the video you see her drawing a wilted flower as that’s how she described the feeling she had to her family “I remember actually using a visual image of a wilted to show how this depression had taken over my life” (Kent, 2021) VR helped her to show and explain exactly how her depression was making her feel.

https://www.medicaldevice-network.com/features/using-virtual-reality-to-overcome-anxious-social-avoidance/ 

But what if VR wasn’t helping to reduce anxiety? “Of course, there’s a case to be made that VR therapy simply cannot be as effective as real-life situation exposure – no matter how fine-tuned it is – because the patient will always know that the situation they’re in isn’t real.” This is a risk but like all therapies some styles work for some while they don’t work for others because of fear your brain can get overwhelmed by the images being seen so you may not have the thought of this isn’t real as quickly as you would if you weren’t being over whelmed with that fear element, Tewari say “People do know it’s not real, but your instinct reacts quicker than the logical parts of your brain. If you have a fear of heights and we simulate that environment in VR, you get stressed before your brain can logically say ‘hang on, this is just a VR headset, this isn’t real’. It’s also important for some people to know that it’s not real – if they didn’t know there was a degree of fantasy then they just wouldn’t do it, it would be too scary for them.” 


https://www.digitalhealth.net/2020/02/mental-health-trust-introduces-virtual-reality-for-phobia-treatment/ 

Another form of anxiety that can affect people’s day to day lives is phobias, they can range from many different scenario’s like getting on a plane, meeting friends, going outside but it can even effect people’s lives medically a phobia of needles can make someone avoid any time of injection they need for example a vaccine, a phobia of enclosed spaces could prevent an individual from getting an MRI that could save their lives. “Previously, practitioners would work with an individual to build up exposure to their phobia by watching videos or finding a stimulus in the real world.
Reeve explained that virtual reality made the experience more realistic than videos and had the added benefit that the experience could be altered or stopped at any time.
“We are also able to completely control the virtual environment, such as changing the weather conditions for someone who is scared of flying, which can really help to prepare them to face every possible scenario in their everyday lives”” (Hughes, 2020) VR could help reduce phobias by allowing a clinician to help guide the user through their anxiety and fear by showing them their phobia whilst allowing them and the user to be in full control of what happens at all times, this is why VR could potentially be more beneficial then real world experiences as there is more control over the situation.

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3772979/ 

https://www.healthline.com/health/mental-health/meditation-virtual-reality#Why-VR-meditation-instead-of-regular-meditation 
Meditation has been used for many years as a way for people to reach inner peace “Mindfulness meditation has met increasing interest as a therapeutic strategy for anxiety disorders, ... This is the first randomized, controlled trial comparing the manualized Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) program with an active control for Generalized Anxiety Disorder, a disorder characterized by chronic worry and physiological hyperarousal symptoms.” (Hoge et al., 2013) This study looked at how meditation could reduce anxiety not many of these studies have been done, it looked at a random group meditating for a period then tested their anxiety and stress levels for days after their meditation session. “These results suggest that MBSR may have a beneficial effect on anxiety symptoms in GAD, and may also improve stress reactivity and coping as measured in a laboratory stress challenge.” (Hoge et al., 2013)  The study only concluded meditation may have an impact on reducing anxiety and stress, but this study was important for the start of more people looking into the wellbeing of meditation for anxiety, it lead this look into VR being used for meditation instead, “The problem with anxiety, of course, is that it makes my mind extra jumpy and extra ready to yank right out of the Zen bliss of meditation and into a hurricane of worries and to-dos. For this reason, unassisted silent meditation is, I believe, particularly difficult for people with anxiety.
Virtual reality helps me overcome this by engaging my senses. With a vista of gorgeous scenery before my eyes and music in my ears, I’m far better able to center myself in the moment than when I try to clear my head of my own volition.
VR gives me something to focus on besides the anxious or intrusive thoughts that constantly vie for headspace.” (Garone, 2019)
 





Garone, S., 2019. How Virtual Reality Meditation Helps Me Control My Anxiety. [online] Healthline. Available at: <https://www.healthline.com/health/mental-health/meditation-virtual-reality#Why-VR-meditation-instead-of-regular-meditation> [Accessed 22 October 2021].
Hoge, E., Bui, E., Marques, L., Metcalf, C., Morris, L., Robinaugh, D., Worthington, J., Pollack, M. and Simon, N., 2013. Randomized Controlled Trial of Mindfulness Meditation for Generalized Anxiety Disorder. The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 74(08), pp.786-792.
Hughes, O., 2020. Mental health trust introduces virtual reality for phobia treatment. [online] Digital Health. Available at: <https://www.digitalhealth.net/2020/02/mental-health-trust-introduces-virtual-reality-for-phobia-treatment/> [Accessed 20 October 2021].

Kent, C., 2021. Using virtual reality to overcome anxious social avoidance - Verdict Medical Devices. [online] Medicaldevice-network.com. Available at: <https://www.medicaldevice-network.com/features/using-virtual-reality-to-overcome-anxious-social-avoidance/> [Accessed 19 October 2021].
